# Flake Structure

The flake structure is inspired by [Doc-Steve](https://github.com/Doc-Steve/dendritic-design-with-flake-parts)
but adapted to work with my systems.

## Usage

The flake ultimately configures systems.
Each machine is referred to as a `host`.
Hosts can have flake outputs defined for them.
This flake has helper functions to build outputs for configurations.

### NixOS

NixOS configurations are generated by `lib.mkNixos` function.
Host configuration entry point is `modules.nixos.<host>` which imports wanted modules.

```nix
{inputs, ...}: {
  flake = {
    nixosConfigurations = inputs.self.lib.mkNixos {
      system = "<arch>";
      name = "<host>";
    };

    modules.nixos.<host> = {...}: {
      imports = with inputs.self.modules.nixos; [
        ...
      ]
    };
  };
}
```



### Darwin

Nix-Darwin configurations, generated by `lib.mkDarwin` function.
Host configuration entry point is `modules.darwin.<host>` which imports wanted modules.

```nix
{inputs, ...}: {
  flake = {
    darwinConfigurations = inputs.self.lib.mkDarwin {
      system = "<arch>";
      name = "<host>";
    };

    modules.darwin.<host> = {...}: {
      imports = with inputs.self.modules.darwin; [
        ...
      ]
    };
  };
}
```

### Home Manager (Standalone)

*(Not used in this repo, might be used in future for non-nixos linux distros.)*

Standalone home-manager configuration, generated by `lib.mkHome` function.
Machine-related config entry point is `modules.homeManager.<host>`.
(This is **seperate** from the *user* config, at `modules.homeManager.<user>`)

```nix
{inputs, ...}: {
  flake = {
    homeConfigurations = inputs.self.lib.mkHome {
      system = "<arch>";
      name = "<host>";
      user = "<host>";
    };

    modules.homeManager.<host> = {...}: {
      imports = with inputs.self.modules.homeManager; [
        ...
      ]
    };
  };
}
```



## Folder Hierarchy

### Root

The root of this repo contains;

- `.envrc`: To auto-load the flake devshell.
- `book.toml`: Render this documentation
- `.sops.yaml`: SOPS configuration to access secrets

### Docs

Contains documentation for entire system management.

### Secrets

SOPS encrypted secrets live in this directory.
Each host gets their own `secrets.yaml` file, along with a shared across hosts file.
It's laid out the same for each user.
The sops files can be reached with `inputs.self + /secrets/...;`.
Hosts also have binary secrets available to them.

### Packages

This is where package outputs of this flake live.
Uses [pkgs-by-name-for-flake-parts](github.com/drupol/pkgs-by-name-for-flake-parts) to export packages.

### Modules

Where the main bulk of the flake configuration lives.
This directory is roughly hierarchical;

#### modules/flake

Where the `flake-parts` and main inputs definition lives.
While the file `modules/flake/nixpkgs.nix` is meant to be for software sources,
it's a one-stop-shop for all OS versioned inputs so that system upgrades are easy.
Modules here, such as `secrets.nix` might be moved to more appropriate places.

#### modules/hosts

Where host configuration resides.
Each host gets their own folder, and the entry points are here.

#### modules/programs

Modules for installing programs into the system.
These modules comes with variants.
Most nixos and darwin variants install the programs to shared home-manager space.
Depending on the program, this behavior might be absent or not.
There is also a rough hierarchy here as well.

- `modules/programs/apps`: Main applications used by users
- `modules/programs/auth`: Authentication and privacy related tooling
- `modules/programs/desktop`: User environments and associated programs.
- `modules/programs/dev`: Development specific tooling.
- `modules/programs/hardware`: Programs for dealing with hardware.
- `modules/programs/networking`: Networking related programs
- `modules/programs/services`: Running services provided by the OS.
- `modules/programs/utils`: Utilities

It is important to note that no user-specific setting is done by these modules.
These modules are meant to be generic between users.
User specific configuration happens in users' spaces.

#### modules/setting

Modules that are not necessarily programs, but configure system behavior.

#### modules/shells

DevShell's provided by this flake.
Central source for devShells are slightly better.
Then when working with other people, repos don't need to be polluted by nix files just for one dev to set up their coding environment.
Also, ideally, the software sources for both the system and the dev shells should be the same, reducing duplication.
The downside is that, it's hard to get direnv to realize upstream changes in devShells if it's changed.
Usually use these commands to force a refresh;

```
nix develop --refresh github:bbaserdem/NixOS-Config-Dendritic#default
nix develop --refresh --option tarball-ttl 0 github:bbaserdem/NixOS-Config-Dendritic#default -c true
```

#### modules/systems

Modules for systems that may be useful to abstract from individual hosts.
VM modules for example can be used to provision configured NixOS as virtual machines.

#### modules/templates

Templates provided by this flake.
Could be for anything, for now contains starter templates for projects.
These are prefixed with an underscore to prevent potential nix files from being loaded by this flake.
Since .gitignore files in templates might ignore other files, all files here have to be force-added.

#### modules/users

User configurations live here.
Each user exports one module for each context with it's user name,
which contains all their config.
Since `enable` flags don't exist in this module, configuring programs that won't be present in the provisioned host is not a problem.

#### modules/wrappers

Programs that use [nix-wrapper-modules](github.com/birdee/nix-wrapper-modules) to configure them.
For now, this is only for neovim, as the wrapper module allows nix to manage plugin installs.
